h1. Lokii

Lokii is a simple framework for handling SMS queues on a local computer. 
It does not communicate with your phone or send SMS messages through the 
internet by default. Instead, you are expected to use gnokii and smsd (or
some other phone interface) to interact with a cell phone and populate the
queue. This may change in the future as Ruby bindings for gnokii are currently
in development.

h2. Setup

Cloning the repository (or downloading th tarball) should get you most of the
way. You are going to need to install Ruby, the daemons gem and you will 
currently need Active Record and Active Support for the database interaction.
Once you have these requirements you will need to setup the databases:

  mysql -u root
  > CREATE DATABASE lokii_develoment;
  > CREATE DATABASE lokii_test;
  > CREATE DATABASE smsd;
  > GRANT SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE ON smsd.* TO 'smsd'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED BY 'smsd';
  
Then you will need to copy and update the example configuration files to your
particular setup:

  cp config/database.example.yml config/database.yml
  cp config/settings.example.yml config/settings.yml
  cp config/smsd.example.yml config/smsd.yml
  
Before the framework will process any messages, you'll need to add some 
workers. Essentially, each number you expect to receive a SMS from should
have a corresponding Worker:

  script/console
  > Lokii::Server.setup
  > Worker.create(:number => '+1951NNNNNNN')

h2. Scripts

Lokii comes with several scripts, +lokii+, +run+, +console+ and +smsd+. The console 
script is a simple wrapper around irb and is nice for interacting on the 
command line. It loads the main Lokii library (and all of the corresponding
application files), but if you want to interact with the database or the server
you will need run +Lokii::Server.setup+ inside the console.

The +run+ script allows you to actually start the processing loop of Lokii.
It will initialize, and check every +interval+ seconds (default is 1) for 
new SMS messages. All of the output is sent to STDOUT as well as the log
(which by default is log/development.log).

The +lokii+ script allows you to run Lokii in daemon mode:

  script/daemon [start|stop|restart]
  
It only allows a single instance of the application to run at a time. Log
information is sent to log/development.log and tmp/pids/lokii.output (which
is used primarily for daemon debugging).

The +smsd+ script is simply a shortcut to invoke the SMS daemon that is part 
of gnokii. For more information on installing gnokii and the sms daemon go 
to http://neverlet.be/2008/10/22/phone-meet-computer.

h2. Writing Handlers

Writing handlers is currently very simple. Simply create the file in the 
app/handlers folder and implement the +process+ method:

  class ILoveYouHandler < Lokii::Handler
    def process
      Lokii::Logger.debug "Processing message with the I love you handler"
      reply "I love you too" if message.text.downcase == "i love you" || message.text.downcase == "i love u" 
    end
  end

This is the most basic kind of handler that will respond to speicifc commands 
or requests with a reply. In order for Lokii to recognize this handler you have
to register it. Currently this is just a modification to the lib/lokii.rb file:

  Lokii::Server.handlers ||= [ PongHandler.new, ILoveYouHandler.new ]

The handlers will be called for each message in the order you list them. If you
want to halt the processing of a message that has already been handled, simply
call the +complete+ method.

h2. Modifying the Server

The server is currently a polling based server that checks for new messages in
the inbox table of the specified smsd database. Replies are simple messages 
added to the outbox. Message completion is nothing more than marking the 
processed flag and re-saving the record.

    def self.say(text, number)
      Outbox.create(:text => text, :number => number)
    end
    
    def self.complete(message)
      Lokii::Logger.debug "Message processing complete"
      message.processed = 1
      message.save!
    end    
  
    def self.check
      Lokii::Logger.debug "Checking for incoming messages" if Lokii::Config.verbose
      messages = Inbox.find(:all, :conditions => "processed = 0")
      messages.each {|message|
        self.handle(message)    
      }      
    end

Modifying these three methods (and possibly the setup method) you could easily
convert the server to use a file based queue. This would allow you to use
the smsd file module or any other program (such as FrontlineSMS) in file 
mode and still use Lokii to do the processing/handling of messages.

h2. Background

Lokii was written to allow someone to quickly build SMS forms using an open 
toolkit. Ideally this project will be used for developing world healthcare,
banking, commerce applications. 

h3. Thanks

Thanks to Darcy Laycock (sutto) as much of this is based on his work on Marvin.
Thanks also to the gnokii folks Daniele Forsi (dforsi) and Paweł Kot (oftokpik).
Thanks to Josh Nesbit and Ken Banks for their SMS work in Malawi.


